When left unmanaged,
conflict can create havoc on your team.
Employees' interpersonal issue can stand in the way
of effective communication and collaboration.
It can create an environment
that feels tense, hostile, or even toxic.
When managed well, conflict brings issues
to team members' awareness and inspires honest dialogue.
It facilitates problem-solving, creates new understanding,
and encourages team members
to learn how to work better together.
As a manager, your leadership
and conflict resolution skills are instrumental.
How you handle conflict can determine
whether conflict unravels your team or makes it stronger.
Your team will be looking at you for direction.
And you can look to the following tips
and techniques for guidance.
First, let's start with the basics.
Bring the employees who are involved
in the conflict together for discussion.
Always set ground rules for the discussion before you begin.
Ground rules are your code of conduct
or rules for conversation.
Get team members to agree
on how they will talk about the problem.
For example, you should always make a ground rule
that says each person treats the other part with respect.
Or another good idea for a ground rule is,
"No interrupting the other person while they're speaking."
Use your authority to set some basic ground rules.
Then invite employees to add a few of their own.
The only rule on ground rules
is that before discussions can continue,
all parties must agree on the ground rules
and verbalize their commitment to adhere to them.
Another tip for conflict resolution
is to let each person tell their side of the story.
Setting ground rules creates a safe space for open dialogue.
Encourage each person to say
what they want the other person to hear
and ask for what they need or want to change.
Respect and acknowledge the validity
of each person's experiences, feelings, and needs.
Finally, be a neutral and active listener
while each person shares their experience.
It's essential that you give both parties
equal attention and speaking time.
Never take sides.
Instead, try to summarize or paraphrase what you're hearing.
Always ask if your observations
and understanding are correct.
All together, ground rules create shared norms
and expectations, which create a space
for open and empathetic communication.
Taking turns sharing stories facilitates understanding.
Employees can communicate the impact of specific behaviors
or situations and ask for what they need.
Finally, being a neutral and active listener
maintains the balance and offers an outside perspective.
But how else can you keep the conversation moving forward?
Here are three techniques to accelerate
your progress toward resolution.
The first technique is to use incomplete sentences.
This involves giving employees sentences with omitted words
that they must fill in with their own response.
For example, you might prompt employees
to fill in the sentence, "I felt blank when you blank."
Or even, "I need blank so that blank."
This technique is great for soliciting a response
from a reserved or withdrawn employee
or even curtailing the lengthy
and convoluted response of a long-winded employee.
Second is to find your baseline.
If things get heated or employees are struggling to agree,
then help them get back to a basic place of understanding.
That's your baseline.
For example, you might ask employees questions
like, "What are the goals of the project?
"What are the constraints?
"What are the expectations of employee conduct?"
Or, "How are work results being impacted?"
Most employees will be able to agree
on a response to these basic questions,
and that will help them to refocus
on shared big-picture items
instead of on their own side or less significant details.
And third is to compare and contrast.
This technique involves asking each party
to compare and contrast what happened in the past
with what they'd like to happen in the future.
For example, "In the past,
"I've been assigned tasks at the last minute
"and told I must complete them by the end of the day.
"In the future, I'd like at least 24-hours notice
"before a task is due."
Use this technique when you wanna transition
the conversation to be more future-focused
and solutions-oriented.
Addressing and effectively resolving conflict isn't easy.
But with some guidance and direct communication,
it can be done.
Use these tips and techniques to help employees
work through conflict effectively
and come out of the other side a better team because of it.